beginner/Exercise_5_remotes.md, before:

# Exercise 5

## Objective
* Add a remote repository
* Explore remote branches
* Exchange information with a remote repository

## Structure
In this exercise we will start to learn about working with remote repositories. A remote repository is usually stored online at GitHub or GitLab. For simplicity, the remote repository for this exercise will be located in the same directory locally, but the workflow would be basically the same.

## Helper Functions
The following helper functions in the file *helpers.sh* are written by C2SM and are **NOT** **part of Git**. They will set up simple repositories for you that have a short Git history, so that you have something to work with.

For this exercise, we will use the following functions from this file:
   * `init_exercise`: This will create the *beginners_git* directory in the parent directory of the *git-course* directory. It will also delete any old version of the *beginners_git* directory, so don't use the *beginners_git* directory to save any work.
   * `reset`: This will delete the *beginners_git* directory and allows you a clean restart of the exercise in case you messed it up completely.
   * `init_simple_repo_remote`: This will create the same simple repository as before, along with a second repository to be used as a remote.

## Remarks
_**Reminder:** Any text enclosed in `<>` denotes a placeholder to be replaced with a specific string appropriate to your context, i.e. delete `<>` and replace it with the appropriate word._

### Initialization

**Note:** You don't need to do the following, if everything is still set up from the last exercise, but you can jump to the exercise directly.

If the `pwd` command returns something like `/home/juckerj/git-course/beginner`, everything is fine:
```bash
pwd
```
If it returns something like `/home/juckerj`, change to the correct directory:
```bash
cd <path to git-course directory>/beginner
```

**To initialize the exercise properly, run this code at the very beginning. Check the Helper Functions section above for more explanation.**


```bash
# source the helpers.sh file to be able to use its functions
source helpers.sh
# init exercise
init_exercise
```

---

### Optional: restart exercise repo

⚠️ **In case you messed up somehow, execute the `reset` function. Check the [Helper Functions](#helper-functions) section above for more explanation.**

```bash
## only execute this in case of (serious) trouble ##
## it will delete your entire beginners_git directory ##
reset
```

## Exercise

In this exercise, we will use the same simple repository that we used before, along with a remote repository. Let's initialize it with our helper function. The following will set up a simple Git repository along with a remote Git repository


```bash
init_simple_repo_remote
```

### Add a remote repository

Let's add a remote repository to our local repository.  

The setup script has already created one for you to use, which you can find here: 

**../conference_planning_remote** (imagine this path to be the path to a repository on GitHub or GitLab)

1. Use the above line as the *remote_path* to the remote repository and choose a name for your remote repository:

```bash
git remote add <remote_name> <remote_path>
```

2. Use `git remote -v` to check that the remote was added correctly.

The output should look something like this:
```
my_remote  ../conference_planning_remote (fetch)
my_remote  ../conference_planning_remote (push)
```

### Get information from remote

So far we have only given our local repository the location of the remote repository. Now, we want to get the information from the remote repository.

1. Use `git fetch <remote_name>` to get information from the remote.

2. Use `git branch -a` to view ALL of the branches in your local repository.

The output should look like this:
```
* main
  remotes/my_remote/main
  remotes/my_remote/updated_schedules
```

You can see that you now have a local branch (*main*), and remote branches (*remotes/\<remote_name>/\<branch_name>*).

### Add remote branch to local repository and make changes

The remote repository has a branch called *updated_schedules*.
Let's check out this branch to work on it.  

1. Switch to branch *updated_schedules*.

The output should look like this:
```
branch 'updated_schedules' set up to track remote branch 'updated_schedules' from 'my_remote/updated_schedules'.
Switched to a new branch 'updated_schedules'
```

Git has automatically created a local branch in our local repository that tracks the remote branch from the remote repository.

2. Let's make a change to the *updated_schedules* branch.
3. Add and commit your changes.
4. Check the status of your repository.

The output should look like this:
```
On branch updated_schedules
Your branch is ahead of 'my_remote/updated_schedules' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

### Send information to remote repository

Finally, we want to commit our changes back to the remote repository. To commit to a remote repository, use the `git push` command.

1. Push commited changes to remote branch.

The output should look something like this:
```
Enumerating objects: 5, done.
Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (3/3), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 350 bytes | 350.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 1), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
To ../conference_planning_remote
   1dacf13..80e64e8  updated_schedules -> updated_schedules
```

**Congrats, you now also know the most essential Git commands for the _remote_ use of Git.**

Commit message:

Link to Initialization for all Exercises

beginner/Exercise_5_remotes.md, after:

# Exercise 5

## Objective
* Add a remote repository
* Explore remote branches
* Exchange information with a remote repository

## Structure
In this exercise we will start to learn about working with remote repositories. A remote repository is usually stored online at GitHub or GitLab. For simplicity, the remote repository for this exercise will be located in the same directory locally, but the workflow would be basically the same.

## Helper Functions
The following helper functions in the file *helpers.sh* are written by C2SM and are **NOT** **part of Git**. They will set up simple repositories for you that have a short Git history, so that you have something to work with.

For this exercise, we will use the following functions from this file:
   * `init_exercise`: This will create the *beginners_git* directory in the parent directory of the *git-course* directory. It will also delete any old version of the *beginners_git* directory, so don't use the *beginners_git* directory to save any work.
   * `reset`: This will delete the *beginners_git* directory and allows you a clean restart of the exercise in case you messed it up completely.
   * `init_simple_repo_remote`: This will create the same simple repository as before, along with a second repository to be used as a remote.

## Remarks   

> **Note:** Any text enclosed in `<>` denotes a placeholder to be replaced with a specific string appropriate to your context, i.e. delete `<>` and replace it with the appropriate word.

> **Note:** The exercises require you to use basic Unix commands. If you are not familiar with Unix systems, we have listed all the necessary commands in the file [Basic Unix Commands](Unix_Commands.md).

If everything is still set up from the last exercise, can continue with [this exercise](#exercise) directly.
Otherwise, please refer to the [Initialization from Exercise 1](Exercise_1_basic_commands.md#initialization).

### Optional: restart exercise repo

⚠️ **In case you messed up somehow, execute the `reset` function. Check the [Helper Functions](#helper-functions) section above for more explanation.**

```bash
## only execute this in case of (serious) trouble ##
## it will delete your entire beginners_git directory ##
reset
```

## Exercise

In this exercise, we will use the same simple repository that we used before, along with a remote repository. Let's initialize it with our helper function. The following will set up a simple Git repository along with a remote Git repository


```bash
init_simple_repo_remote
```

### Add a remote repository

Let's add a remote repository to our local repository.  

The setup script has already created one for you to use, which you can find here: 

**../conference_planning_remote** (imagine this path to be the path to a repository on GitHub or GitLab)

1. Use the above line as the *remote_path* to the remote repository and choose a name for your remote repository:

```bash
git remote add <remote_name> <remote_path>
```

2. Use `git remote -v` to check that the remote was added correctly.

The output should look something like this:
```
my_remote  ../conference_planning_remote (fetch)
my_remote  ../conference_planning_remote (push)
```

### Get information from remote

So far we have only given our local repository the location of the remote repository. Now, we want to get the information from the remote repository.

1. Use `git fetch <remote_name>` to get information from the remote.

2. Use `git branch -a` to view ALL of the branches in your local repository.

The output should look like this:
```
* main
  remotes/my_remote/main
  remotes/my_remote/updated_schedules
```

You can see that you now have a local branch (*main*), and remote branches (*remotes/\<remote_name>/\<branch_name>*).

### Add remote branch to local repository and make changes

The remote repository has a branch called *updated_schedules*.
Let's check out this branch to work on it.  

1. Switch to branch *updated_schedules*.

The output should look like this:
```
branch 'updated_schedules' set up to track remote branch 'updated_schedules' from 'my_remote/updated_schedules'.
Switched to a new branch 'updated_schedules'
```

Git has automatically created a local branch in our local repository that tracks the remote branch from the remote repository.

2. Let's make a change to the *updated_schedules* branch.
3. Add and commit your changes.
4. Check the status of your repository.

The output should look like this:
```
On branch updated_schedules
Your branch is ahead of 'my_remote/updated_schedules' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

### Send information to remote repository

Finally, we want to commit our changes back to the remote repository. To commit to a remote repository, use the `git push` command.

1. Push commited changes to remote branch.

The output should look something like this:
```
Enumerating objects: 5, done.
Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (3/3), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 350 bytes | 350.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 1), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
To ../conference_planning_remote
   1dacf13..80e64e8  updated_schedules -> updated_schedules
```

**Congrats, you now also know the most essential Git commands for the _remote_ use of Git.**
